# April 27: Meeting 2

## **Today:** Functions, Namespaces & Modules, String Formatting, Exceptions

### Functions
*   Functions are blocks of code that can be reused, and should be designed to perform
    a single, well-defined action. Functions in Python are designated by the ``def`` 
    keyword:
    
        def print_1_to_N(N):
            """ This function prints from number 1 up to AND including
                the number specified in the arguments
            """
            for num in range(1, N+1):
                print(num)
    
    When I write functions, I always add a multi-line comment directly under the
    definition that describes what the function is supposed to do. Often I will 
    also describe the arguments it accepts, and what data types are allowed. Functions
    are really just objects in Python, so **functions can be passed as arguments to 
    other functions**. This is an extremely useful thing to do!
    
    Suppose I'm writing a function that relies on some other function to fit a
    line to some data points. Let's say in my initial implementation, I just
    want to do a least squares fit, but in the future I want to swap that out
    for something more robust. Of course I could go in and change that line of
    code, but let's say I need this function in another project to just do a
    quick least squares fit. I don't want to have to have to keep going in and
    modifying the code, so instead I can pass in the fitting function as a 
    parameter to the function I care about:
    
        def some_complicated_function(data, fit_data_function):
            """ Do some complicated stuff, then fit a line to
                some data and use the result to do more complicated stuff.
            """
            # Complicated stuff!
            
            slope,intercept = fit_data_function(data)
            
            # More complicated stuff!
            
            return slope, intercept
    
    Say my least squares function is called ``least_squares()``, I could call
    the above like this:
    
        >>> some_complicated_function(data_to_fit, least_squares)
        
    Note that we don't specify the parentheses when passing the function name
    in as an argument! Also note the ``return`` keyword which returns an object.
    In this case, specifying two objects with a comma packs them into a tuple, so
    if I were to do:
        
        >>> output = some_complicated_function(data_to_fit, least_squares)
        
    ``output`` would be a tuple with 2 values: slope and intercept.
    
    Arguments to functions can be specified sequentially, or by specifying the
    names when you call the function. For example, if I have a function:
    
        def do_science(x, y, z):
            """ Science! """
            return x, y**2, z**3
            
    I can call it either by listing the arguments in order, or by specifying the
    argument names:
        
        >>> do_science(10, 17, 24)
        (10, 289, 13824)
        >>> do_science(z=24, x=10, y=17)
        (10, 289, 13824)
    
    There is a special operator for handling arbitrary argument lists and keyword
    arguments. For example, say I wanted to write a function that accepts any number
    of arguments, and prints them all in the order they were specified -- how could 
    I do that?
    
        def magic(*args):
            """ Perform magic """
            for arg in args:
                print(arg)
    
    Putting a ``*`` in front of a name in the argument section of a function declaration
    tells the interpreter to pack all un-named arguments into a tuple, in this case called
    ``args``. You may also want to accept arbitrary *named* arguments, often called *keyword
    arguments*. You can do this by putting two stars, ``**``, in front of a variable name,
    and the interpreter will create a dictionary of keyword:value pairs!
    
        def more_magic(**kwargs):
            """ Do more magic """
            for key,val in kwargs.items():
                print(key, val)
                
        >>> more_magic(place="Camelot", knights=["Galahad", "Lancelot", "Patsy"], tree_tool="Herring")
        tree_tool Herring
        knights ['Galahad', 'Lancelot', 'Patsy']
        place Camelot
    
    You can also set default values for arguments by assigning them values in the
    function declaration:
        
        def count_to_N(N=10):
            """ Count from 1 to N """
            for num in range(1, N+1):
                print(num)
    
    Here, N will have a default value of 10, so I can call it with or without a value
    specified:
        
        >>> count_to_N(5)
        1
        2
        3
        4
        5
        >>> count_to_N()
        1
        2
        3
        4
        5
        6
        7
        8
        9
        10
        
    All of these things can be combined to create functions with sophisticated 
    calls:
    
        def complicated_function(a, b=10, *args, **kwargs):
            """ Demonstrate complicated argument definition """
            print("a is required because it has no default value", a)
            print("b is optional because it has a default value (10)", b)
            print("These are the arguments:")
            for arg in args:
                print(arg)
            
            print("These are the keyword arguments:")
            for key,val in kwargs.items():
                print(key, val)
    
    Now I could call this with only one argument, since ``a`` is the only required
    one:
    
        >>> complicated_function(100)
        a is required because it has no default value 100
        b is optional because it has a default value (10) 10
        These are the arguments:
        These are the keyword arguments:
        
    But now I can specify an arbitrary number of arguments, both named and
    sequential:
        
        >>> complicated_function(100, 70, "these", "are", "args!", time="noon", hour=12)
        a is required because it has no default value 100
        b is optional because it has a default value (10) 70
        These are the arguments:
        these
        are
        args!
        These are the keyword arguments:
        hour 12
        time noon
    
    Let's do an example! [MonteCarloPi.py](examples/MonteCarloPi.py)

--------------------------

### Namespaces & Modules
*   Because Python is a dynamically typed language, you can assign a *name* to almost anything. 
    The most familiar of course are variables, where we just assign values to names:
    
        >>> a = 5
    
    But you can also give names to functions, which can get passed around just like variables:
        
        def some_function():
            print("Hi")
        
        f = some_function
        f()
    
    A *namespace* is a mapping from names to objects that Python carries around and updates 
    whenever you create a new variable, function, or import another module. You may have noticed
    that we have been using some special keywords (e.g., ``def``, ``int()``, etc.) without having
    to define them first. Special Python keywords and built-in functions are added to your 
    namespace automatically so they're always available for you to call. 
    
    A Python *module* is just a file containing Python code, but in some sense represents an
    isolated namespace -- for example, consider the file below:
    
    [NamespaceExample1.py](examples/NamespaceExample1.py)
        
        def print_list(the_list):
            """ Given a list of values, print each value on a new line """
            for item in the_list:
                print(item)
        
        a = 15
        b = 25
        print_list([a,b])
    
    We defined 3 names in this document: ``print_list``, ``a`` and , ``b``, so we might say
    we added 3 names to the namespace. But what namespace? The module's global namespace. We
    can import code from one module into another module by using the ``import`` keyword, and
    leaving off the .py extension. Let's say we make another file with exactly the same variables
    and function, but with slightly different code:
    
    [NamespaceExample2.py](examples/NamespaceExample2.py)
        
        import NamespaceExample1
        
        def print_list(the_list):
            """ Given a list of values, print each value on a new line, padded with whitespace """
            for item in the_list:
                print("    {}".format(item))
        
        a = 148
        b = 11
        print_list([a,b])
    
    What happens? I just imported three names: ``a``, ``b``, and ``print_list()``, but then I define
    the same three names! Thankfully, nothing gets overwritten here because the names are in different
    namespaces contained within the same *global* namespace: the three names we define in the new module
    are in your *local* namespace. You can access the names in the other module using dot-notation, for
    example to access the value of ``a`` we stored in NamespaceExample1, I would do:
    
        NamespaceExample1.a
    
    instead of just
        
        a
    
    But what if in NamespaceExample1 I had imported another module? As an example, let's
    add a line to the top of NamespaceExample1:
    
        import os
    
    This imports a built-in Python package called ``os`` (we'll talk about this later so
    don't worry about the details). Now the name ``os`` is part of NamespaceExample1's 
    namespace. So how could we access functions in this module from another module or
    the Python shell?
    
        import NamespaceExample1
        print(NamespaceExample1.os.getcwd())
        
        (try it!)
    
    Why does this work? NamespaceExample1 is a module, but also an object! An object with 
    attributes, some of which may point to other modules which are other objects with their
    own attributes and functions!
    
*   There are a few different ways to import modules. The first is the clearest,
    and it is what I showed before:
        
        import os
    
    This gives you access to everything within the module's namespace, but when you're
    writing code it's still obvious where functions and attributes live. Every time I want
    to use a function in ``os``, I have to use dot notation to call the function so it 
    explicitly shows the origin:
        
        import os
        os.getcwd()
    
    **Explicit is better than implicit.**
    
    If you are importing a module with a long name, it can get annoying typing out this
    name every time you call a function, so you can also import a module as some other name:
    
        import NamespaceExample1 as ns1
        print(ns1.a)
    
    You will see this a lot with ``numpy``, ``matplotlib``, and other packages which have
    standard abbreviations (e.g., ``numpy --> np``, ``matplotlib.pyplot --> plt``).
    
*   You can also import a name or a few names directly into your namespace by using the
    ``from`` keyword:
        
        from NamespaceExample1 import a
        print(a)
    
    This is fine for uniquely named functions or variables, but let's consider a real-world
    example of why this might be a bad way to import things into a namespace. Both ``numpy``
    and the ``math`` packages have ``log()`` functions. ``math.log`` operates only on single
    numbers, whereas ``numpy.log`` operates element-wise on an array or list of values. Let's
    say I have some code that imports both:
    
        from numpy import log
        from math import log
    
    When we do the second import, it is overwriting the local name 'log' -- if you think of
    the namespace as a dictionary (mapping names -> objects), you can't have two of the same
    keys! If I then try to call the ``log`` function on a list, the way ``numpy.log`` works,
    it will fail!
        
        >>> log([1,2,3])
        Traceback (most recent call last):
          File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
        TypeError: a float is required
    
*   There is a third way to use import, **but you should never do this**, and that is to 
    import all names from a module into your local namespace. **But you should never do this! 
    Seriously!**
    
        from numpy import *
    
    imports all (*) names from numpy into your namespace.

*   The *scope* of a name in Python is a textual region of a program where it is directly accessible.
    Don't worry too much about the details, except know the order at which Python will check 
    namespaces for a name you specify.
    
    * 1) The local scope, all local names
    * 2) The scope of any enclosing functions
    * 3) The module's global names
    * 4) Built-in names
    
    Notice one thing: built-in names are checked last! If I defined a variable called ``dir``:
        
        >>> dir = "Some text perhaps?"
    
    and then try to call the built-in ``dir()`` function, it won't work! Python will see that
    there is a locally defined variable called ``dir`` *before* it checks for any built-in 
    functions.

------------------------------------

### String formatting

*   String formatting in Python recently got overhauled, so I'm going to briefly
    show you the old way to do it **at the end of this section**. On to the right
    (new) way to do it!

*   Strings are objects, so there is a special ``format()`` method that let's us
    replace placeholder fields with values of any type. To designate a placeholder
    in a string, we use curly braces:
    
        >>> "This is a string with {0}".format("placeholder")
    
    But what does the 0 mean? Strictly speaking, it means take the 0th argument of the
    ``format()`` function and stick it where the ``{0}`` was. (In this example I could 
    have left it out since I only had one placeholder and one argument, but it's good
    to be explicit.) The number inside the curly brace specifies the index of the object
    in the argument list of ``format()`` that will get substituted into the string. I
    could of course specify multiple, mixed object types to ``format()``, and control 
    the order that they appear in the string:
    
        >>> "Here {2} {0} ways to do {1} formatting".format(3, type(""), "are")
    
    The ``format()`` accepts both args and kwargs, as we discussed in the Functions
    section above. Remember that this means it can take arbitrary numbers of parameters,
    which can then be substituted in for placeholders in the string you are formatting.
    When using keyword arguments, instead of specifying the index with a number, you can
    put the keywork name between curly braces:
    
        >>> "{name} is not coming to the {place} at {time}".format(name="Tom", time="1:00", place="meeting")
        'Tom is not coming to the meeting at 1:00'
    
    There are a bunch of other nice formatting tricks, but it'd take a long time to go through
    them all! For example, cou can control precision of floats, or pad lines with zeros and spaces,
    but you should have a look at [Dive Into Python: Strings](http://www.diveintopython3.net/strings.html)
    for more details.
    
    I promised I would say something about the old style of string formatting, since it
    is still seen from time to time in old code and with people who can't seem to let go!
    Instead of curly braces, the old style formatting used the percent symbol as a placeholder,
    but you also had to specify a data type after the symbol. For example, to place a string 
    you would use ``%s``, but to place an integer you would use ``%d``. Then, all of the 
    replacements appear after the string in a tuple:
    
        >>> "This is an %s style string with %d replacements" % ("old", 2)
        'This is an old style string with 2 replacements'
    
*   There are a ton of other useful string operations, such as ``index(), split(), count(), 
    replace()``
    
    *   ``index()`` finds the starting index of an input string
        
            >>> "This is a sentence".index("is")
            2
    
    *   ``split()`` will split the string into a list of items wherever the supplied
        argument appears. If no argument is specified, it splits on whitespace.
            
            >>> "Here are some words".split()
            ['Here', 'are', 'some', 'words']
            >>> "Here,are,some,words".split(",")
            ['Here', 'are', 'some', 'words']
    
    *   ``count()`` counts the number of times some string appears in the parent string.
        
            >>> "abc abc abc abc abc bcd".count("bc")
            6
    
    *   ``replace()`` replaces some string with another string in the parent string.
        
            >>> "abc abc abc abc abc bcd".replace("bc", "23")
            'a23 a23 a23 a23 a23 23d'
    
---------------------------------------

### Exceptions

*   By now you've probably encountered some errors in Python, so let's talk about how 
    *exceptions* are handled in Python. There are two types of errors you can receive: 
    SyntaxError, and exceptions (everything else). A SyntaxError will occur at compile 
    time -- e.g., if you forget a colon after a function definition, or have wonky 
    indentation. 
    
        >>> for num in range(10)
          File "<stdin>", line 1
            for num in range(10)
                               ^
        SyntaxError: invalid syntax
        
    All other errors are thrown at runtime. Some examples are ``TypeError``, for example 
    when you're trying to get an object of some type to do something it can't do:
        
        >>> 1 + '50'
        Traceback (most recent call last):
          File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
        TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for +: 'int' and 'str'
    
    ``NameError`` if you haven't defined a variable, or type a variable name incorrectly:
    
        >>> cats = 2
        >>> print(czts)
        Traceback (most recent call last):
          File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
        NameError: name 'czts' is not defined
    
    You can build your code to handle exceptions by using the ``try except`` block. It
    makes sense in English (or pseudocode):
    
        try:
            this block of code
        except some error happens:
            do this instead
        except some other error happens:
            do something else
            
    In reality, you would specify an exception after the except keyword to catch a certain
    type of error:
        
        try:
            x = int(raw_input("Enter a number: "))
        except ValueError:
            raise ValueError("You must enter a number!")
    
    Or, you can simply say ``except`` and catch all exceptions, but I would recommend not
    doing this! Sometimes you want your code to break, rather than cover up things that
    may be going wrong. One aside is that often I will write ``try except`` blocks like the
    above, where I catch and error but then re-raise the error. ``raise`` is another special
    word in Python that will throw a specified error. The benefit here is you can control the
    text that gets spit out with the error, so you can make it more descriptive and thus easier
    for the user to understand what might have gone wrong.
    
    You can catch multiple exceptions at once by specifying a tuple of exception classes. If
    you then want to throw the type of exception that brought you there, you can specify the
    ``raise`` keyword with no specified exception class.

        try:
            x = int(input("Enter a number: "))
            y = int(input("Enter another number: "))
            print(x / y)
        except (ValueError, ZeroDivisionError):
            print("You must enter a valid non-zero number!")
            raise
    
    (try it!)
