# May 18: Meeting 4

> **Note**: We're going to use ipython, so if you don't have it installed you'll have to
            add 'plt' in front of every function and object call we make.

## **Today:** A demo of Matplotlib

### Matplotlib -- A demo!
*   I've uploaded a sample csv file that I downloaded directly from the SDSS DR7 website, and
    put it [here](sdss_result.csv). We're going to work with this file so make sure to download it!

*   A particularly annoying issue with Matplotlib is that there are typically a few different
    ways to do the same thing. I really only use two of these: the (pseudo) object-oriented way, 
    and the "quick" way. I recommend using the object-oriented way, but I'll show you both below.

*   Start up an ipython / pylab session by typing the following into your shell:
    
        ipython --pylab
    
    This loads the entire pylab (matplotlib.pyplot) namespace into the interpreter
    (yes, it does `from __ import *`...). In fact, this also imports numpy for you,
    so you can access all of the numpy functions using the ``np`` name (e.g. ``np.arange()``).

*   We'll start by loading in our data file. Remember what we did last week!
    
        >>> data = np.genfromtxt("sdss_result.csv", delimiter=",", names=True).view(np.recarray)
        
    Remember that doing ``.view(np.recarray)`` let's us access the columns with dot notation.
    You'll notice one of the column names is 'u', so we can get that information:
        
        >>> print(data.u)
    
*   As I mentioned above, there are two ways to create an actual plot. One way is more like 
    functional programming, the other is a little more object-oriented. Let's say we want to
    plot the positions of the objects in this catalog. The first way we could do it is with 
    the ``plot`` command:
        
        >>> plot(data.ra, data.dec, marker='.', linestyle='none')
    
    this is typically the fastest and easiest way to just look at some data. This is fine for
    simple plots, or just quickly looking at your data. You can do things like set the x axis
    limits, labels, and title using the following functions:
        
        >>> xlabel("RA")
        >>> ylabel("Dec")
        >>> title("Positions of stars")

*   Let's consider a more complicated example. Now I want to make 4 subplots on the same figure
    to plot the colors of these objects. Using the same sort of functional method as before, we
    can do the following (first do ``clf()`` to clear the figure):
        
        >>> subplot(221)
        >>> plot(data.u - data.g, data.u, marker='.', linestyle='none')
        
        >>> subplot(222)
        >>> plot(data.g - data.r, data.g, marker='.', linestyle='none')
        
        >>> subplot(223)
        >>> plot(data.r - data.i, data.r, marker='.', linestyle='none')
        
        >>> subplot(224)
        >>> plot(data.i - data.z, data.i, marker='.', linestyle='none')

    Now let's say I want to go back and add a label to the first subplot. I have to specify
    that subplot, and then use the ``xlabel()`` function:
    
        >>> subplot(221)
        >>> xlabel("u-g")

*   Another way to do this is to use the ``subplots()`` helper function. This function will
    create ``Figure`` and ``Axes`` objects for you, and give you an *array* of axes objects
    back:
        
        >>> fig, axes = subplots(nrows=2, ncols=2, bbox="tight")
    
    Now if I want to plot on the figure, the axes are already made, and I have all of the ``Axes``
    objects stored in the (in this case 2 by 2) array ``axes``:
        
        >>> axes[0,0].plot(data.u - data.g, data.u, marker='.', linestyle='none')
        >>> axes[0,1].plot(data.g - data.r, data.g, marker='.', linestyle='none')
        >>> axes[1,0].plot(data.r - data.i, data.r, marker='.', linestyle='none')
        >>> axes[1,1].plot(data.i - data.z, data.i, marker='.', linestyle='none')
    
    But wait, nothing happened?! In this case, Matplotlib doesn't know the objects changed -- 
    so you have to ``show()`` the changes.
        
        >>> show()

*   In ipython you can also do some pretty cool visualizations by looping and using the
    ``draw()`` command, which redraws the entire figure. Let's all do this!