# May 11: Meeting 3

> **Note**: It is convention to abbreviate Numpy as np, so I will assume in all code
    snippets below that you have already done:

    import numpy as np

> **Note** 2: I definitely recommend using [ipython](http://ipython.org/) when executing
    code in the interpreter. It is a really nice improvement over the vanilla Python
    interpreter. Depending on how you installed Numpy and Scipy, you may already have
    it -- to test, just type ``ipython`` in your terminal.

> **Note** 3: IDL people -- [this page will be your friend](http://mathesaurus.sourceforge.net/idl-numpy.html).

## **Today:** A tour through Numpy and Scipy

### Numpy
*   [Numpy](http://numpy.scipy.org/) provides a strong programmatical and mathematical 
    foundation for scientific programming in Python. The object that really defines 
    this package is the Numpy array: ``numpy.ndarray``. These arrays can be multi-dimensional 
    (N-dimensional --> nd) array, but must contain **homogeneous** elements (most often numbers).
    Dimensions are sometimes referred to as ``axes``.
    
    Arrays are created by passing a list to the ``np.array()`` function. Remember to put the
    square braces in or you'll get an error!
    
        >>> someArray = np.array([1,2,3,4,5])
        >>> someArray = np.array(1,2,3,4,5)
        Traceback (most recent call last):
          File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
        ValueError: only 2 non-keyword arguments accepted
    
    Remember that these arrays must be **homogeneous**. The above case will create an
    array of integers, but what will happen if we do this?
        
        >>> someArray = np.array([1,2,3,4,5.])
        
    We've passed in a list with 4 int's and 1 float -- rather than truncate the float,
    Numpy will cast everything to be a float!
    
    Some important properties of arrays are ``ndim``, ``shape``, ``size``, and ``dtype``.
        
    *   ``ndim`` returns the dimensionality of the array. For the above cases, this is 1.
        We'll talk more about multi-dimensional arrays later.
    *   ``shape`` returns a tuple with the number of items in each dimension. Since the
        above cases are 1 dimensional, you'll get a tuple with one item:
            
            >>> someArray.shape
            (5,)
            
    *   ``size`` is the total number of elements in the array (the product of each number
        in the ``shape`` tuple).
    *   ``dtype`` tells you the datatype of the elements in the array by returning a ``dtype``
        object (we'll come back to this). For example:
        
            >>> np.array([1,2,3,4,5]).dtype
            dtype('int64')
            >>> np.array([1,2,3,4,5.]).dtype
            dtype('float64')
            
    How do we create multi-dimensional arrays? Well, there are many ways. One way is to pass
    in a sequence of sequence-type objects into the ``np.array()`` function, for example a 
    list of lists:
        
        >>> twoDArray = np.array([[1,2,3],[4,5,6],[7,8,9]])
        >>> print(twoDArray)
        [[1 2 3]
         [4 5 6]
         [7 8 9]]
    
    You could also ``reshape`` a one-dimensional array:
        
        >>> someArray = np.array([1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9])
        >>> print(someArray)
        [1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9]
        >>> print(someArray.reshape(3,3))
        [[1 2 3]
         [4 5 6]
         [7 8 9]]
    
    Note that this returns a new array with the desired shape. You can also change the
    shape of the object you're working with (without creating a new one) by setting the
    shape property:
        
        >>> someArray.shape = (3,3)
        >>> print(someArray.shape)
    
    Indexing on multidimensional arrays works by separating indices (or slices) by a 
    comma:
        
        >>> someArray = np.array([1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9])
        >>> someArray.shape = (3,3)
        >>> someArray[0,2]
        3
        
    For two-dimensional arrays, this refers to the 0th row, 2nd column. 
    
    >   **Note**: you might also see someArray[0][2], but this is a less efficient way of
        doing it because it will first create a new object from the first index, 
        ``someArray[0]`` (get the 0th row), then it will get the 2nd object in the
        returned object. Doing someArray[0,2] retrieves the element in one shot.

*   There is another very useful Numpy array object, and that is the **recarray**, short for
    record array. Record arrays allow you to access data through *fields* rather than remembering
    indices. Record arrays require you to not only specify the data, but also a series of names
    and data types within your structure (collectively know as the ``dtype``). 
    
    > **Note**: Be careful -- the way you specify the data is slightly different for record arrays!
    
    A useful example is to consider a table of data:
        
         Order Number |  Quanity  |  Year
        ----------------------------------
             23459    |     1     |  2012
             23451    |     8     |  2011
             23475    |     13    |  2012
    
    Let's say I start with 3 lists or 3 arrays corresponding to the 3 tables: ``order_number``, 
    ``quantity``, and ``year``. To create a record array from this, I have to create a new array
    where each row is a **tuple**. Recall that we can easily do this with the ``zip()`` function:
        
        >>> zip(order_number, quantity, year)
        [(23459, 1, 2012), (23451, 8, 2011), (23475, 13, 2012)]
    
    The magic required to turn this into a record array may look a little strange...The way to
    do it is to create a datatype object, create a normal array with the specified datatype object,
    and then "view" it as a record array. 
        
        >>> datatype = [('year', int), ('order_number', int), ('quantity', int)]
        >>> data = np.array(zip(order_number, quantity, year), dtype=datatype).view(np.recarray)
        >>> print(data.year)
        array([23459, 23451, 23475])
    
    Even though this might look a little strange, it's awesome and I use it all the time!
    
    Another way to create these record arrays is with a pre-existing Numpy array. For example,
    let's say I have a 2D array of random numbers, ``arr``:
        
        >>> arr
        array([[ 0.82497072,  0.85836793],
               [ 0.48068787,  0.11338566],
               [ 0.64559089,  0.24151577],
               [ 0.54577055,  0.00467509],
               [ 0.45491494,  0.30168128]])
        >>> arr.dtype = [('cat', '<f8'), ('dog', '<f8')]
        >>> record_arr = arr.view(np.recarray)
        >>> record_arr.cat
        array([[ 0.15783621],
           [ 0.03831477],
           [ 0.19409145],
           [ 0.83726827],
           [ 0.89172274]])
    
## A few very important points...
*   **Numpy arrays are like C arrays**:
    
    **Arrays** are *contiguous blocks of memory* consisting of a single type, **lists** are
    *arrays of memory addresses* (of objects). Remember that integers in Python are 
    *unbounded*:
        
        >>> a = 23892898912934192391459132945192349
        >>> print(a) 
        23892898912934192391459132945192349
    
    But if I try to stuff this into an array with an integer data type:
        
        >>> np.array(a, dtype=int)
        Traceback (most recent call last):
          File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
        OverflowError: Python int too large to convert to C long
    
    Aha! We can't do it. Ok, well, we can -- if we don't specify the data type (we usually don't
    have to), Numpy will do something tricky and use the datatype "object" -- so now our array
    is basically a list (an array of memory addresses)!
    
        >>> np.array(a)
        array(23892898912934192391459132945192349L, dtype=object)        
    
*   **Numpy array operations apply *elementwise***
    
        >>> [1]*5
        [1, 1, 1, 1, 1]
        >>> np.array([1]) * 5
        array([5])
        
    This means they act like arrays you may be familiar with, or vectors:
        
        >>> np.array([1.,2.,3.]) + np.array([4.,5.,6.])
        array([ 5.,  7.,  9.])
        >>> np.array([1.,2.,3.]) * np.array([4.,5.,6.])
        array([  4.,  10.,  18.])
    
    This applies to comparison operators as well! If you want to know which items in an
    array are greater than some number, you can do:
        
        >>> np.array([1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]) > 4
        array([False, False, False, False,  True,  True,  True,  True,  True], dtype=bool)
    
    This returns a **boolean array**. Boolean arrays are nice because numpy arrays allow you
    to index with arrays. The boolean array must have the same *shape* as the array you are
    trying to select out of, but wherever there is a ``True`` it will take that element, 
    and add it to a new array, otherwise it ignores it:
        
        >>> index_array = np.array([True, False, False, True, True])
        >>> np.array([1,2,3,4,5])[index_array]
        array([1, 4, 5])
    
    You can also use an array of indices to index an array. Read that sentence again. In this
    case the index array can have arbitrary
    
        >>> index_array = np.array([0, 1])
        >>> np.array([1,2,3,4,5])[index_array]
        
*   **Functions I use the most**
    
    *   ``np.arange()``
    *   ``np.linspace()`` / ``np.logspace()``
    *   ``np.ones()``
    *   ``np.zeros()``
    *   ``np.where()``
    *   ``np.genfromtxt()``

*   **This really just scratches the surface!** -- [Read This Tutorial!](http://www.scipy.org/Tentative_NumPy_Tutorial)

*   Now let's take a tour of some of the sub-packages within both Numpy and Scipy...
        